---
layout: post
title: "It's me!"
categories: blog
share: true
tags: []
---

I'm Aaron Sky. I live in Rochester, NY studying Game Design & Development at the Rochester Institute of Technology. I am an app and web developer by trade, and have some terrible apps on various app stores. My portfolio is linked above. Maybe you found this blog through my portfolio. That's pretty neat.
<!--more-->

This is probably going to end up being yet another programming blog powered by Jekyll and hosted by GitHub, but my plan is to write about whatever topic happens to be on my mind at the moment. I want this blog to be a project for me; one that I would like to flourish like some of my other personal projects have. Personal projects and the self-determination that leads to finishing them are how I got my last internship at [Xamarin](https://xamarin.com/), and I strongly believe in their importance as an engineer. 

I started my programming adventures with Java, though I had a less-than-meaningful experience with VB.NET programming a Space Invaders clone in Windows Forms for a class. Since then I have worked extensively in C#, JavaScript, Java, Objective-C, and have worked professionally with Swift, CoffeeScript, Ruby, and several others. My favorite language to work in is C# and I'll probably end up writing an article on it at some point, but I don't personally believe that a perfect, truly "best" language has been built yet. I try to avoid that kind of demagoguery when I can. 

To end this off, a few loose facts about me:

* I grew up outside Washington D.C. around the Dulles Tech Corridor during the late 90s and all of the 00s. After I moved to college in Rochester my family found opportunities in New Bedford, Massachusetts, which is where my roots are now.
* My favorite professional book is [Code Complete](http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0735619670/codihorr-20) by [Steve McConnell](http://www.stevemcconnell.com/). Yeah, I'm one of those programmers. 
* My favorite game is Mother 3, and I have been a member of the EarthBound-centric [Starmen.net](http://starmen.net/) since 2009.
* I got my app development start learning Objective-C in 2010, but I started developing apps professionally in 2013 at the recommendation of an adjunct professor in my department who worked full-time for Microsoft at the time. I started developing for the web shortly thereafter. 
* I chose Game Design & Development as a major at RIT because it was the only program I could find on the East Coast that a) was at least a four-year program, b) was comprehensive outside of pure game design, and c) had a mandatory co-op requirement. I've found that all of these requirements have been exceptionally necessary as I moved away from game design as a career interest in my sophomore year, and focused more on software development (since games are just highly-coupled, monstrously-scoped performance-optimized software). 
