---
layout: post
title: "Why I Educate: Looking back on learnVCS"
categories: blog
share: true
tags: []
date: 2015-12-13T13:20:00-05:00
---

There's only a few more days left in my penultimate semester. That's pretty crazy. Part of me is amazed it went by so fast, but the other part of me is pretty thrilled it's over. I'm proud of the work I've done this term, but above all else, I'm proud of the work my team and I have accomplished leading a major student-driven initiative born out of my co-op experiences. 

A bit of background: two summers ago, I was working on a sizable games project with a friend from school the summer following our second year. We used Git and Bitbucket and it was my first big experience learning basic version control fundamentals. I had been taught a little bit of SVN in a single freshman class, although saying we were taught is a bit of an overstatement (we were basically told to use TortoiseSVN for the big project, given a brief functionality overview and then never revisited it or general version control principles again). The following semester, I discovered my peers had absolutely no working knowledge of version control and I had a hard time convincing any of them to use it in our group projects. It wasn't until I was at my last job when I realized just how little my department had prepared me in this regard. 

It's unreasonable to expect that a good engineering program must teach you absolutely everything you need to know. Not only is that unrealistic, but self-discovery is one of the best ways to become a better programmer. While some of my mechanical and electrical engineering friends will balk at me saying this, many of the principles of learning effective construction are consistent between hardware and software engineering and this is one of those commonalities. With all that in mind, any academic program that purports to teach software development (because games are absolutely software) has to give attention to version control in a meaningful, repetitious way. Version control is essential to the collaboration process, and given the fact my department normally ingrains that process exceptionally well, it isn't taught at any level.

I educate for a number of reasons. I believe the traditional model of schooling is broken and is unsustainable in the long run. I believe education has the power to bring about great change, and I want to be part of big things. Teachers of all sorts make up most of my extended family on both sides, so there may be influence on that front. Most importantly of all, education has the power to make people happy and bring them the joy of satisfied curiousity, and making people happy is one of the greatest joys of all for me. When I see someone curious about a topic or a broken system with potential for me to help, like in the case of my department's approach to version control, it makes me want to do something.

Fast-forward to last Friday, with the conclusion of my team's big initiative. My team and I have developed a website, a design document, and some presentation slides for my department this term in order to improve the state of version control education in my department. The website can be found at http://learnvcs.github.io, our design document can be found [here](http://learnvcs.github.io/blog/design/), and the slides can be found [here](https://github.com/learnVCS/documentation/tree/master/slides). Everything is open-sourced under an MIT License and will hopefully help an educator of software construction somewhere present version control to their entry-level classes without overloading them with information.

learnVCS was built by [Benjamin Wilcox](http://benjwilcox.com/), [Stephanie Jurgiel](http://www.stephaniejurgiel.com/), and myself over fifteen weeks. We used React for the live interactive commits graph, Sass for the styling, Grunt for the build system, Scrum for the development style and Git for the VCS. The project was overseen by Professor Steve Maier, formerly of Microsoft, and Dr. David Schwartz, the department chair of the School of Interactive Games and Media at RIT. I wrote the backend over the course of three weeks, maintained and updated it over the following six weeks, and tested it rigorously throughout. I was also responsible for writing and editing nearly all the content, maintaining the build system and repositories, and building out the front-end React behaviors. 

This project taught me a lot of things I can't expect I would learn without immense risk in the real world. This was my first big production and management role and all my experience with a good PM comes from my last job. I learned to plan out the project as a series of well-scoped sprints, oversee the project on high and low levels, improve my ability to speak designer, and separate the rest of my team from the direct oversight of higher overseers. I worked very hard on the build system and I'm really proud of our Grunt configuration, which could only be more robust if we wrote more tests. I had to teach myself CoffeeScript in the span of a week in order to be able to modify our fork of [react-commits-graph](https://github.com/jsdf/react-commits-graph) and make it work the way we needed it to. 

In the end, I couldn't have asked for a better project my senior. learnVCS was an excellent crossroads of some of my passions: programming, education, and the web. It remains to be see how much impact it will have on my department, but it won't stop me from trying to influence the way things are done here in my last semester.
