---
layout: post
title: "Chronic Illness and Time"
categories: blog
share: true
tags: []
---

I have Crohn's Disease. I have been demonstrating symptoms since I was four years old and have dealt with it for most of my life. Constant medical struggle has been always been a prevalent concern for me, but I consider myself almost lucky for it beginning as a young child. I have never let my chronic illness define me, even as it informs significant aspects of my outlook.

<!--more-->

Crohn's (and its sister IBD, ulcerative colitis), are conditions you either have and wrestle with, or you may know someone who does. The United States Center for Disease Control estimates that [over 1 million people in the US have a form of IBD](http://www.cdc.gov/ibd/ibd-epidemiology.htm), while acknowledging their estimate is lower than reality due to the lack of standard criteria for diagnosis of Crohn's and colitis. I'm not a doctor and would never claim to be, so I want to avoid discussion of the symptoms or give the impression I know know any hidden secrets to coping with chronic illness. What I do have may appear on the surface to be a platitude. 

You need to take care of yourself.

I'm writing this as I prepare for a surgery to resolve my first remission in nearly nine years. My last flare-up occurred when I was 14 years old, and as inflammation in my ileum lead to the development of a 10cm abscess and an intestinal obstruction, I lost a solid three-month chunk of my life. I had my first bowel resection in February of 2008, and I will be getting my second in a few days. My lapse in health this time around is much less severe. I was very bad about taking my medication in college for no other reason than negligence, and it caught up with me in May. Stress from working three jobs and finishing my last semester aggravated inflammation in my ileum (near the site of my last resection), and eventually I was put on a steroid in July to deal with my flare-up. After I tapered off the steroid, symptoms came back worse, so I was hospitalized. A 4cm abscess was found connected to the intestine via a fistula, which guarantees the need for surgery following a six-week tenure with an abscess drain. 

I can't say for certain if my recent turn in health was caused by any lone factor. I cook for myself a lot, and consider myself pretty nutritionally aware. That said, after moving to the city, the nutritional value of the food I ate definitely dropped. Crohn's is known to be aggravated by changes in diet. Crohn's can also be worsened by heightened stress. The aforementioned crazy schedule that engulfed my January to May, in addition to starting a new job in June and dealing with the inherent life adjustments that follow graduation, probably didn't help my stress levels much. Finally, my erratic medication schedule during my college years made me more vulnerable to flare-up, and there's no excuse for me there. I have made a deliberate effort to take my medication consistently again after coming to terms with my irresponsibility. While those three are among the most common reasons for flare-up, due to the highly personal nature of Crohn's, you have to be conscious of what causes problems specifically for you. 

Chronic illness is something I've dealt with for a long time, but it isn't who I am. It's definitely shaped much of how I view the world and it's forced me to grow up in ways some of my peers have not. While hospitals are still deeply troubling places for me, I have no fear of needles, injections, drawing blood, or taking pills anymore, and I had to get over those fears at a young age. The malnutrition that marked the beginning of my experience with Crohn's forced me into a picky eater phase that lasted until I was 13, nearly a decade later. Even though it keeps coming back and I know it will never go away, I don't feel ruled by my illness. When I'm in remission, I'm a superstar. I'm only held back by myself, my own doubts, and the distance to the nearest bathroom. Because I developed this so young, my condition and health are completely normalized in my head. I'm not shy about my situation and I always aim to speak frankly about my condition. I imagine I'd be singing a different tune if I had developed Crohn's in high school or in the last few years, and that's a big part of why I consider myself lucky in the grand scheme. 

If you're out there reading this piece and you have a chronic illness (or even an IBD like Crohn's or colitis), there a couple things I want you to know. First, thanks for reading! I appreciate you reading this far into my late night pre-surgery babble. Second, you are not alone, and you don't owe anyone anything for your illness. You are not your illness, it's just another piece of the complex tapestry that is you. That may be sappy, but that's because it's 2AM and I'm very sleepy. 

_Sidenote: I've been working on a number of side projects to keep myself busy. Work has been gracious enough to let me work from home while I've spent the last several weeks recuperating away from the city, but I still need something to fiddle with in my off time. I've been working on Ibizan again purely for myself, even though I'm off the Fangamer contract. I decided to move away from CoffeeScript and Hubot and transition into a TypeScript code base running on Botkit, while using Google's official Sheets libraries instead of a third party interface. I've really been enjoying TypeScript and I intend on writing something about it here eventually, so look forward to that. I've also recently gotten hooked on Picross games again on my 3DS, so I've been experimenting with a small Picross-like game in SpriteKit._