---
layout: post
title: "Adventures in Freelance: Looking Back on Ibizan"
categories: blog
share: true
tags: []
---

Back in January I was messaged by a good friend of mine, Reid Young of Fangamer. He wanted to know if I could make them a Slack bot to simplify their timesheet recording process. Despite committing to another project shortly before and having already signed on as an iOS TA for another semester, I figured I could handle three part-time jobs at the same time as my classes. However, this post isn't about my workload. This is about Ibizan, the dog-themed time-tracking Slack bot.
<!--more-->

[Ibizan](https://github.com/ibizan/ibizan) is a dog-themed timesheet-tracking bot for your Slack team. You can use it to clock in and out, record vacation time, sick time, and unpaid work time directly from Slack. It provides utilities for tracking time spent on projects, attaching notes to your recorded time, and handling of date ranges and block-time. It records everything onto a Google Sheets spreadsheet so things are easy to read and modify if something's wrong. Ibizan will hound you within a user-configured window of time to check in and make sure you've punched in or out. Ibizan is also scheduled to produce daily work reports for its users and run a payroll report every two weeks. 

Ibizan is written using [CoffeeScript](http://coffeescript.org/) and is built on top of GitHub's [Hubot framework](https://hubot.github.com/). If I were given the opportunity to redo Ibizan I would not have used CoffeeScript. There's a fair amount to like in CoffeeScript, such as comprehensions and its quality implementation of super, but the absence of tooling and named anonymous functions made things very difficult to debug and I found myself missing some of the tools I enjoyed in the [other project](http://skyaaron.com/blog/atlas-post-mortem/). I used the [Slack API](https://api.slack.com/) and the [Google Sheets API](https://developers.google.com/google-apps/spreadsheets/) heavily in the development of Ibizan. The best parts of my developing day were working with the Slack API, which is solid, feature-rich, and generally gratifying to use. On the other hand, the Google Sheets API is limiting, and as a result I couldn't create a truly seamless connection between Ibizan and the spreadsheet. There are alternatives with some potential, but by the time I found them, I was out of time to completely revamp the spreadsheet backend.

With all that said, I felt like Ibizan is some of my best work in terms of code structure and long-term planning. I put a lot of thought into Ibizan's class structure and the language parser, which "swiss-cheeses" any input it gets to extrapolate meaning and stores the rest as punch notes. Reid was gracious enough to grant me total ownership of Ibizan and the code, which motivated my plans to open source it and present it at [Imagine RIT](https://www.rit.edu/imagine/planyourday16/exhibit.php?id=1229). Ibizan also represents my first foray into freelance, which was very exciting for someone about to graduate college in two days. I wish I could commit to this project longer, but I'm trying to minimize chaos as I start a new full-time position in Boston in June. Once I get my life squared away, I'd like to revisit this one. 

Coming Soon: I would like to talk about my experiences completing a full course-load in my final semester while simultaneously working three part-time jobs in a future blog post. I'll probably be talking about the importance of project-planning and scope and how you can apply those same principles to your own life. Hopefully it'll be good.

_Sidenote: This article was meant to be published back on May 7th for Imagine RIT, but the chaos of preparation leading up to that event caused this article to fall by the wayside._