---
layout: post
title: "Collaborative Education: Looking Back on Atlas"
categories: blog
share: true
tags: []
date: 2016-05-18T12:00:00-05:00
---

Last semester, after completing learnVCS with my team of cool people, I met with Dr. David Schwartz, my department chair, to discuss the future of student involvement in shaping the IGM curriculum content. I wanted to use learnVCS as a jumping off point for future student-driven curriculum development and thought he might have some input. What Dr. Schwartz had for me was an opportunity. He had a high concept with some partially completed but ultimately unusable work, and a completed grant project that was making a transition to web technologies. After three months of hard work, that project ended up becoming Atlas. 
<!--more-->

To reiterate some of the talking points from learnVCS, I believe that student contribution is a necessary facet of maintaining a constantly-changing and continuously-relevant curriculum. I spear-headed learnVCS in an effort to force a change in how VCS education is approached in my department, and while the full effects will not be known for a while, if at all, I've heard a lot more people talking about version control this semester than last semester. After the successful completion and the above-and-beyond work my team and I produced, I was in a position to make something happen to help Dr. Schwartz achieve his high concept.

At its heart, Atlas is a tangential learning model for viewing tutorials. On the front-end, you follow from one node to the next, observing the connections between each and following the learning path where your interests take you. Each node links to a GitHub repository, which provides code and/or documentation on that topic. There is a [contribution](https://github.com/IGME-RIT/contribute) workflow in place to allow for public submissions of tutorials to Atlas. I specifically designed this aspect of Atlas to mesh well with existing open source contribution strategies, so Atlas can be an open collection of information that grows in cooperation with the open source community.

Atlas encompasses several components. Atlas encompasses the [front-end](https://github.com/IGME-RIT/igme-rit.github.io), codenamed EPAR, which is written by Ryan McGlinn and is based on previous work. Atlas encompasses the [IGME-RIT GitHub organization](https://github.com/IGME-RIT) itself, which is set to contain dozens of tutorials for various subjects related to the curricula in my department. Finally, Atlas encompasses the [back-end](https://github.com/IGME-RIT/backend), which pulls everything together from the organization into a database to be served to the front-end. I was responsible for the back-end and putting together the contribution workflow. Working on the back-end gave me a good opportunity to dive deeper into the dynamics of the MEAN stack, and I got to roll my own OAuth interface for the first time. 

Communication was a big issue with Atlas. I was only able to work twice a week on the project, and I was kept to a maximum of 10 hours per week for this project. I worked well with the front-end group, who was present in the labs five days a week,  Meanwhile, the team members on tutorial creation were difficult to reach and we weren't on the same page. To illustrate this, the day we managed to get everyone in the lab so I could give a tutorial on adding tutorials to Atlas was my last day of work. Front-end and back-end were consistently on the same page, which was good, but in the future I would want content development on that page as well.

Overall, Atlas was a solid project that gave me some sweet relief from some of my other work. When I needed to relax and just work on something that could let me just detach from the other work piling up in my classes or [Ibizan](http://skyaaron.com/blog/ibizan-post-mortem/), I could just spend a little time fiddling with Atlas to speed it up, improve its security, or document it better. For some, it's strange that I was able to find relaxation from more work, but that's how I've been since junior year of high school. Even as I write this, I'm working on a small project (that I hope to be writing about soon), solely as a means of avoiding doing my finals. Atlas feeds that side of me, where going on tangents and exploring new ideas is the entire point, and that could be why I enjoyed working on it so much. 